---
title: "AWS Solutions Architect Professional Certification"
date: 2024-10-24T10:35:36-05:00
slug: "aws-pro-sa"
# TURN THIS OFF TO PUBLISH
draft: false
tags: ["AWS", "Certification", "IT", "Studying"]
# Whether to show on the home view (highlights) or not
showInHomeView: true
linkTo: ""
---
## The Solutions Architect Professional certification: Why bother?

Amazon Web Services is the juggernaut of cloud computing. When I work with large tech-first companies, the question isn't whether they use AWS; it's whether they use anything else in addition to AWS. AWS is what Microsoft was in the 90's. 

{{< marginnote "I've mostly used Kubernetes in the past." >}}
That means when I'm planning out security solutions with customers, they'll use AWS terminology, concepts and practices. AWS is the lingua franca. Even on Azure, GCP, Kubernetes, or on-prem, the building blocks are going to be their own twists on AWS services. 
{{< /marginnote >}}

You could learn AWS by studying on your own, but the certificate gives you a concrete goal to study for and a little proof of your expertise at the end. So why not do it?

Out of all the AWS certificates, I chose the Solutions Architect Professional certificate because I like a challenge.  I'm hoping to get equivalent certs on the other two major clouds soon.

## The Challenge
This certificate is extremely challenging. AWS recommends two years of experience as a lead cloud architect before even starting to study for it.
It covers all areas of AWS, including networking, security, storage, compute, serverless, and the added-value services that AWS has built on top. 

I wasn't starting from scratch! I built a static site in S3 back in 2009, built various applications on top of AWS in 2012-2018, and consulted on security with AWS customers 2020-2023. Even then, it was a significant amount of work to study for and then pass this exam.

## The Process
I used three primary resources to study for the exam: 

1. AWS Documentation. AWS spends an enormous amount of time crafting high-quality documentation, so it makes sense ot use it. It is well-written and even calls out potential "gotcha" arwas. But there is far too much documentation to read all of it, so you have to be selective. 
1. ACloudGuru's courses. I watched all the videos for the associate-level and professional-level exams. They are roughly 30 hours of content, combined, and include practice exams and hands-on labs.
1. Adrian Cantrill's course. This one is about 70 hours. It also includes a few practice exams. 

Overall, I found ACloudGuru to be the best for practice exams and labs, while Adrian Cantrill had far better lectures that go into much more detail. I'd recommend both resources.

{{< callout heading="Watch at 2x speed" >}}
I always find it extremely hard to pay full attention to pre-recorded online lectures because of the inconsistent pacing. I recommend going at 2x speed, and then slowing down when you don't understand something. This is better than trying to pay attention to things that you already know, and getting bored.
{{</ callout >}}

{{< callout heading="Flash cards" >}}
Spaced-repetition flash cards are an effective way to remember details. I made my on flash card app and used it a bit, although it wasn't my main means of studying. I'll link to it in the future. 
{{</ callout >}}

## What to study

### History and context
A bit of history. It's important to know that S3, EC2, and SQS were the original three services, and EBS, IAM and VPCs were bolted on later. Then other services came after that. This helps you explain why S3 has its own permissions mechanism separate from IAM, or why not all instances have EBS volumes.

Also there have been many high-profile breaches caused by insufficient S3 access permissions. Hence the multiple attempts at adding better security to S3. 

AWS initially used Xen virtualization under the hood, but switched completely to their own hypervisor called Nitro in around 2016 which may be based on KVM (I'm not certain). 
That explains a bit about why there are different AMIs that support each. 

AWS used to let instances access their own metadata through a very simple service called IMDS. After a high profile breach, they updated to IMDSv2, which is more secure - but IMDS is still available by default. 

For most of AWS history, you had to SSH into an instance directly. A whole universe of products called "privileged access management" cropped up to restrict and monitor users SSHing into instances. AWS didn't develop just one alternative -- they now have *two*, Instance Connect and Systems Manager Session Manager (say that one ten times fast). 

{{< marginnote "AWS is on its own here. The other clouds used OIDC from the start." >}}
Also, for most of AWS history, users had fixed static Access Keys and Secret Access Keys. AWS is really trying to get away from that, with multiple different ways to get temporary Access Keys and Secret Access Keys. 
{{< /marginnote >}}


### Compute
   1. Actually less on compute than you might expect. 
   1. Para vs. HVM
   1. AMIs
   1. Placement groups
   1. Behavior around rebooting, stopping, and editing instance details
   1. Launch templates
   1. IMDSv2
   1. Reserved instances (convertible and not), and selling reserved instances
   1. Spot instances
   1. Dedicated instances
   1. Fabric

### Queues
   1. SQS
   2. SNS (easy to mix up with SQS!)
   3. Amazon MQ
   4. Kinesis
   5. Kinesis Firehose (very different from regular Kinesis)
   6. Managed Kafka
   4. IoT MQTT

### Networking
   1. VPCs
      1. CIDR blocks
      1. Internet gateways (regional)
      1. NAT gateways (zonal) (expensive!)
      1. Gateway endpoints (used for private S3 and DynamoDB access)
      1. VPC Peering
      1. IPv6 addressing and egress
      1. Client VPN endpoint; link aggregation for VPNs; authentication for VPNs
      1. IPAM
      1. Routing tables
      1. Subnet allocation
      1. Splitting subnets
      1. What to do when peering two VPCs with overlapping subnets
      1. Transit through a VPC is (mostly) not allowed
      1. Recommended architecture: VPC per project with a central Shared Services VPC
      1. Overall, need to have a strong understanding of which VPC resources are zonal and which are regional
      1. Flow logs
      1. Mirroring
      1. NO multicast support!
   1. Client VPN 
   1. Site-to-site VPN
   1. Transit gateway
   1. Global accelerator (GAX)
   1. Direct Connect (DX)
      1. DX is hard/impossible to experiment with on your own!
      1. MACsec
      1. Link aggregation with 2 DX, or 
      1. Differences between dedicated DX and managed service provider DX
   1. ENIs
      1. Security groups
        1. Using one security group as an ID in a different security group
        1. Difference between Security Group and NACL
      1. Performance basics: accelerated network interfaces, fabric
      1. Attaching one ENI to multiple VPCs 
   1. Shield / Shield Advanced
   1. Auto Scaling Groups
      1. Especially behavior in balancing across zones
   1. Load balancers
      1. NLBs
      1. ALBs
      1. TLS termination
      1. Interaction with Auto Scaling Groups
      1. In practice, you want *most things in AWS* to be behind some kind of load balancer, as you want fine-grained control 
   1. API Gateway
      1. REST mode understands requests and provides more detailed functionality (doesn't actually HAVE to be REST)
      1. Non-REST mode just uses HTTP
   1. VPC Lattice
      1. This is not actually on the test yet, but it seems to be AWS' big networking thing, so it probably will be soon.
    
### Storage
   1. FSx -- understand all modes
   1. Storage gateway -- again, understand all modes
   1. Instance store
   1. EBS
       1. Basic performance and reliability characteristics
       1. Expanding a volume
       1. Snapshots
       1. RAID arrays of EBS volumes and when to use
   {{< marginnote "S3 predates the rest of AWS, so of course everything depends on it." >}}
   {{</ marginnote >}}
   1. S3
       1. S3 is the core storage service for AWS.
       1. S3 gateways in the VPC
       1. Bucket policies & IAM
       1. Origin access control
       1. Replication between regions
       1. Tiering/service levels
       1. Object lifecycle management
       1. Mounting with Amazon's s3mount utility, or synching with the aws command line
       1. Pre-signed requests for upload and download
       1. Transfer
           1. Basically a serverless FTP/SFTP endpoint that can talk to your buckets.
        1. Storage Transfer Service
           1. Sophisticated tool for moving data between S3 and other services on a schedule or driven by events.
        1. Lambda objects
        1. Triggering events from S3 actions (both within S3, and also CloudWatch Events)
        {{< marginnote "S3 Express One Zone is a limited, cheaper version of S3. Maybe they should call it S2?" >}}
   1. S3 Express One Zone
       1. This is a very different service that happens to be under the S3 brand name. It has totally different semantics from S3.
       {{</ marginnote >}}
   1. EFS
       1. Use on Linux and Windows
       1. Transit encryption -- this actually just uses stunnel at the application layer!
       1. Pricing (this one's expensive)
   1. Snowball Edge
       1. This started as a storage device, but now has a lot of compute capabilities too.

### Databases
1. RDS
   1. Data migration
   1. Schema migration
   1. Supported databases
    1. MySQL
    1. Postgres
    1. SQL Server
    1. Oracle (it works a bit differently)
    1. DB2 (also a bit odd)
    1. Gaps in functionality between these, e.g. a good deal of stuff is not available on DB2
    1. BabelFish
1. Replication and promotion
1. Maintenance windows
1. Backup RTO and RPO
1. Aurora
    1. Despite the marketing, Aurora is basically RDS with an improved storage layer. 
    1. Global databases
1. Authentication for these
1. DynamoDB
    1. Performance quotas 
1. Read the Dynamo paper! 
1. Partition and sort keys
1. Quotas and performance management options
1. DAX
    1. Always needs 3 nodes!
1. DynamoDB gateways in the VPC (again)
1. Managed ElasticSearch
1. Athena
1. Redshift
1. Redshift Spectrum
1. Caches:
   1. Managed Memcached
   1. Managed Redis/Valkey
   1. You really always want to be using Redis/Valkey. Memcached is usually a red herring.

### Security
{{< callout "IAM" >}}
IAM is a huge topic on its own. You could write a long book just about IAM. This is the most significant single study area. _Truly mastering IAM would probably take years of study._ Be forewarned!
{{</ callout >}}
{{< marginnote "Cognito is a confusing service that does way too many different things." >}}   {{</ marginnote >}}
   1. Accounts, users, and organizations
   1. ARN format 
   1. Cognito 
      1. Identity federation for applications
      1. Identity federation into AWS users
   1. IAM
      1. Need to be able to write and read IAM policies fluently. 
      1. Understand resource and user policies
      1. Understand roles
      1. Understand using roles across accounts
      1. IAM Federation using SAML and OIDC
      1. Tricky stuff: can never block all services in the us-east-1 region, even if you want to limit users to only one other region! 
      1. Auditing and checking policies work as expected
      1. Permissions boundaries
      1. Service control policies
      1. 2fa setup
      1. AWS-managed policies
   1. STS {{< marginnote "STS is AWS' core identity service. Everything else is built on it." >}}{{</ marginnote >}}
   1. Simple Directory Service (basically Samba)
   1. Managed Active Directory (basically Windows Active Directory)
   1. Federating with your own AD server across DX or VPN
   1. RAM
      1. Share a VPC between accounts
      1. Certain resources can be shared with RAM
      1. Kind of a kludge outside using proper IAM policies to accomplish the same thing
   1. Cognito
      1. User pools vs identity pools
   1. Presigned requests (again)
   1. Control Tower: know basics
   1. Landing Zone: know basics (but really you should just use this)
   1. EC2 Instance Login
      1. Login to instances with Instance Connect
      1. Login to instances with Systems Manager Session Manager
      1. Behavior of SSH keys in the EC2 console
   1. GuardDuty
      1. General threat detection service
   1. Macie 
      1. Special tool for S3 security only (strange name)
   1. Firewall Manager
   1. Web Application Firewall
   1. Config
      1. Tracks versions for every AWS object in your account
      1. Remediates configuration drift
      1. Expensive
   1. CloudTrail
      1. Logs every action that affects AWS objects
      1. Understand differences between CloudTrail, CloudWatch, and Config
   1. Security Hub
   1. Inspector
   1. Limiting what users can deploy using Service Catalog or CloudFormation Stacks
   1. Label policies
   1. PCA
      1. Run a CA for your own stuff
   1. KMS
      1. Heart of all encryption functionality in the AWS universe
   1. HSM
      1. Really for compliance requirements; very expensive
   1. Roles Anywhere
      1. Access APIs with certificates instead of STS tokens
   1. IRSA
      1. Access roles from Kubernetes
   1. Shared responsibility model

### Billing
   1. AWS Budgets
   1. AWS Cost Control
   1. Having a single budget account within an org
   1. Marketplace
   1. Billing for APIs that you create using API Gateway

### Serverless
   1. ACR
   1. ECS
   1. Fargate
      1. Can run in ECS or lambda modes
      1. Can even run locally now
   1. Lambda
      1. Versioning
      1. 15-minute limit
      1. Attaching to VPC
      1. Attaching to EFS
      1. Roles 
      1. Base images
      1. Building new base images
   1. Step Functions
      1. Mini programming language for building state machines out of multiple lambda functions
      1. Similar to state machines
      1. Can build an entire system using lambda and step functions
   1. Batch
   1. Using CloudWatch Events to auto-trigger things
### IoT
   1. Surprisingly, there were several questions on this, even though it's a very niche area
   1. Provisioning with certificates
   1. Queueing messages with MQTT
   1. Device updates
### CloudFormation
   1. You do not have to know how to write a template
   1. But you do have to know how they deploy, how to use variables, how to nest templates
### Migration
   1. Know the services AWS provides for migration
   1. Application discovery on VMWare
   1. Migration Hub
   1. Mainframe migration tools
   1. 3 R's, building a migration strategy
### Other services
   1. Workspaces
   1. Marketplace basics
   1. VMWare on AWS - why use it?
   1. EKS - extreme basics only, this is not a Kubernetes test
   1. Elastic BeanStalk - getting old but still relevant
   1. Support tiers
   1. Outposts
   1. Look at all the stuff AWS offers for running locally on your own machine

### Observability
   1. CloudWatch
   1. X-Ray (basics only)
   1. Inspector (basics only)

### Don't bother learning
   {{< marginnote "Many of these topics are discussed in the DevOps Professional exam" >}}
   {{</ marginnote >}}
   1. CloudFormation details
   1. Terraform, Ansible, Chef, Puppet (although having a basic knowledge of all would be useful)
   1. Specific command lines
   1. More than basic knowledge of using the console
   1. AWS APIs
   1. Pricing details
   1. Names or characteristics of specific instance types
   1. Very advanced topics in networking and performance
   1. HPC

## Pricing
The test does not cover pricing. This makes some sense, since most companies have negotiated agreements that come with substantial discounts, and AWS changes pricing all the time. 

But you always need to remember that AWS wants you to run up as large a bill as possible. Often, the "recommended" approaches will incur hundreds or thousands of dollars a month in unnecessary expenses, when a simpler and cheaper solution is available. 

AWS is a bit like Amazon.com: They already have your credit card number, and make it very easy to spend a lot of money that you don't really need to. And they don't necessarily want to train their certified experts in how to reduce costs. 

## _The most important thing_
The test is **extremely time limited**. The questions and answer choices are long, complicated, and often confusing. You only have about two minutes per question, so you'll have to read and understand very very quickly. _Many people who know all this material won't be quick enough to answer the questions in the time allotted._

It's vital to take practice tests in order to get into the rhythm of answering these long, winding, multi-part questions. I found ACloudGuru's practice tests to be very good, and did all of them (some multiple times). 
{{< callout >}}
*If you're not a fluent English speaker, and you're taking the test in English, it is going to be an extreme challenge.*
{{</ callout >}}




## Is this a useful certificate?
Yes. Understanding the array of options for building things on AWS is extremely helpful. You could easily save a company millions of dollars by going down the right path instead of the wrong one. It is also a challenging enough certificate that not too many people have it. 

However, it doesn't really require hands-on experience. You don't have to find a problem with a failing network configuration, or know how to actually write a query for any of the many databases. You could come out of this test knowing how to whiteboard a complex system perfectly, but without the experience to actually do it. 

I wish the material covered modern immutable infrastructure in more detail. Unless you're migrating old stuff, there's absolutely no reason to have traditional always-on services in a cloud environment. 

Another thing is that many of the services are extremely expensive, so they may be impractical to use at your company even if they're the right tool for the job. I've heard horror stories about companies enabling Config and suddenly increasing their bills tens of thousands of dollars! Of course AWS won't emphasize how to save money on their own platform. 

## Fun things I learned along the way
* Adrian Cantrill is an incredible teacher. I do my own technical trainings sometimes, and I hope I can make mine half as good! 
* NAT gateways are pretty expensive for personal use (at least $30/month). Can I avoid them by using IPv6 (so no NAT is required)? YES! Although a few key sites like GitHub still don't work on IPv6.
* You can create multiple accounts on AWS using `username+account1@gmail.com`, `username.account2@gmail.com`, etc. And each gets $300 in AWS starting credits.
* ChatGPT is a great study buddy. It has very good knowledge of AWS, perhaps because so many people write about it. 
* I posted about passing the test on Twitter, and got what really appears to be a personal congratulations from AWS. I didn't tag anyone there. Very kind of them!
* Apparently if you pass all the AWS tests, **they send you an exclusive gold jacket.** This would be a fun challenge, especially if you can get someone else to pay for all the courses and exam fees!

## Cost of taking the exam
I was paying for all of this out-of-pocket, so cost was a concern. In total, I spent around $550:
1.  Around $80 for Adrian Cantrill's course (one time fee)
1.  $35/month for ACloudGuru access, adding up to about $150
1.  $300 exam fee
1.  About $50 of AWS fees on top of the $300 in free starting credits they give you (I accidentally left something running for a month)
I think it's worth it, but I understand not everyone has that much cash available up-front. If you can, see if your employer will pay for these expenses.

If you pass one exam from AWS, they give you a 50% off discount on your next exam. So by taking an easier (and cheaper) exam first, you may be able to save $150. 

## Conclusion
This was a fantastic journey, and I'm glad I did it. I went from having detailed knowledge about a few specific AWS areas, to deep knowledge about almost every user-facing service they provide. It took me around 200 hours of study over a few months to get to that level. I would compare it to roughly the same effort as an advanced-level college course.

I'm not sure if I'll ever be responsible for AWS in an operational capacity in the future, but I'm confident I can at least communicate with the people who are, and speak the same language. 

Plus it was a fun challenge! 

## What's next? 
I'm hoping to get high-level certifications on all 3 clouds, and do the CKA, and do a few security certs! So it's a long road ahead for me.